---
layout: post
title: Closure
tags: javascript closure
---


## Scope

Although Javascript defines two matching curly braces for blocks,
__there is no such thing as block scope in JavaScript__. Instead,
function scope is what it's got. Parameters and variables defined
within a function are not visible outside the function, and a variable
defined anywhere in the function is visible everywhere within the
function.

```js
function foo() {
    if (false) {
        var a = 1;
    }
    console.log(a); // => undefined
}
console.log(a);     // => ReferenceError: a is not defined
```


## Immediately-invoked function expression

In JavaScript, it's god damn easy to pollute the _global environment_.
To prevent this, it's a common pattern to wrap the your code in an
immediately-invoked function, aka IIFE, pronounced "iffy".  It can
also be used to achieve information hiding (more on this later) and
avoid _variable hoisting_ from within blocks.

```js
(function() {
    // code goes here...
}());
```

## Emulate block scope
We can also use IFFE to emulate block scope.

```js
for (var i = 1; i <= 3; i++) {
  (function(i){
    $element.click(function() { alert(i); });
  })(i);
}
```

Normally, the variables is not scoped within the `foo` loop, when the
element gets clicked, it will always the final value of `i`, 3. Wrap
it in an IFFE solved this perfectly. Nice shortcut with CoffeeScript:

```coffee
for i in [1..3]
  do (i) ->
    $element.click -> alert(i)
```


## Closure

According to the function scope, the inner function includes the scope
of the outer function. It gets interesting when the inner function's
lifetime expands longer than the outer function. The inner function will
still have access to the outer function's scope even after it have returned.

Suppose we want a counter, since it's a counter, we never want it to
decrement and be set to a value other than a number, so the counter
value must be __private__.

```js
var Counter = function (start) {
    var count = typeof start === 'number' ? start: 0;

    return {
        inc: function (inc) {
            count += typeof inc === 'number' ? inc : 1;
            return count;
        },
        get: function () {
            return count;
        }
    };
};

var counter = new Counter();
// the outer function returns here,
// but count is still accessible
counter.inc(); // => 1
counter.get(); // => 1
```

The function's scope keeps the `count` variable hidden from the rest
of the program, the only way to deal with it is through the two
privilege methods: `inc` and `get`.

What if we want two counters to work simultaneously, will they
interfere with each other?

```js
var foo = new Counter();
var bar = new Counter(6);

foo.inc();
bar.inc();

foo.get(); // => 1
foo.get(); // => 6
```

Each `Counter` object has its own unique set of variable, its own `count`,
create its own `inc` and `get` functions, which are able to __close over the
`count` variable__. So they won't interfere with each other.


## Caveats

A very common mistake is to use closures inside a loop.

```js
for(var i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
    setTimeout(function() {
        console.log(i);
    }, 100);
}
```

You would expect this will print numbers 0 to 9, but it will simply
print `10` ten times. Because JavaScript does not have block scope, the
`i` inside `for` will always refer to the same `i`, at the time `console.log`
gets called, the value of `i` has been set to 10.

The solution: create a closure that close over `i`, wrap the `setTimeout`
with an immediately-invoked function and pass in the value of `i` at that time.

```js
for(var i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
    (function(e) {
        setTimeout(function() {
            console.log(e);
        }, 1000
    })(i);
}
```
